

A Half - Century of Progress in Health: The National Academy of Medicine at 50

Vaccine Innovations — Past and Future

Vaccination is a powerful method of disease
prevention that is relevant to people of all
ages and in all countries, as the Covid-19
pandemic illustrates. Vaccination can improve people’s chances of survival, protect
communities from new and reemerging health threats, and enhance societal productivity. But
achieving the promise of vaccination requires much more than
the vaccines themselves. It requires appropriate incentives to
encourage the timely discovery
and development of innovative,
effective, safe, and affordable
products; effective financing and
delivery programs; and credible
scientific leaders who can provide evidence-based policy recommendations and reassure the public about the value of the vaccines.
Since its inception 50 years ago,
the National Academy of Medicine (NAM), previously known as
the Institute of Medicine (IOM),
has been an authoritative resource
on medical issues, including vaccination, and a global leader in
vaccine-policy development.
It’s hard to overstate the benefits that innovative vaccines deployed in the past five decades
have had on morbidity and mortality (see timeline). The incidence of vaccine-preventable diseases among U.S. children has
decreased dramatically, an achievement that is attributable in part
to high vaccine-coverage rates.
By the 2018–2019 school year,
coverage rates among kindergarteners exceeded 90% in all but
two states, according to data
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Four
vaccine-preventable illnesses have
been eliminated from the Americas: smallpox in 1971, poliomyelitis in 1994, and rubella and
congenital rubella syndrome in 2015 (one of us is an executive
vice president at Merck, which
produces vaccines for rubella,
among other vaccines). Moreover,
between 2011 and 2020, immunization programs in low-income
countries saved an estimated
23.3 million lives.
Perhaps the most notable
immunization-related accomplishment during the past half century was the eradication of smallpox, which was verified by the
World Health Organization (WHO)
in 1980. In addition, global cases
of paralytic polio have decreased
by 99.95% from the estimated
350,000 cases in 1988, when the
global polio-eradication program
was announced, and two of the
three wild-type polioviruses, WPV
types 2 and 3, have been eradicated.
Other important achievements
during this period include the
1986 approval of the first vaccine
based on recombinant technology, a hepatitis B vaccine that
not only has reduced rates of the infection in many countries but
was also the first vaccine to reduce cancer risk. In 1987, the
first polysaccharide-protein conjugate vaccine was licensed; since
then, the incidence of invasive
Haemophilus inf luenzae type b disease among children has fallen
394 dramatically. In 2009, a vaccine
for Neisseria meningitidis group A
became the first licensed vaccine
specifically designed for certain
people in low-income countries.
Achieving broad population
health benefits associated with
vaccination requires effective policies that create incentives for vaccine development, ensure financing of vaccines, and improve
access. After a measles outbreak
in 1989–1991, the U.S. Vaccines
for Children Program was authorized in 1993 to ensure that eligible children would have free access to all CDC-recommended
vaccines. To address remaining
gaps, the IOM in 2000 issued a
landmark report that recommended policy and programmatic
improvements to strengthen U.S.
immunization programs. One outcome of this effort was the requirement included in the 2010
Affordable Care Act that plans
provide first-dollar coverage (coverage without copayments or other
cost sharing) for vaccines recommended by the CDC’s Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices for children and adults up to
age 26.
Policy advances have also enhanced the effects of vaccination
globally. The WHO launched the
Expanded Program on Immunization in 1974 to increase access
to vaccines. Beginning in 2000,
the benefits of this program were
greatly enhanced by the creation
of Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, an
international public–private partnership that provides financial
and programmatic support to ensure that children in the poorest
countries have access to vaccines.
In 2017, with the support of the
NAM and other organizations,
this model was used as a framework for the creation of the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness
Innovations to fund innovative
vaccines and other countermeasures against pathogens that cause
devastating public health consequences, such as the Ebola virus
and now SARS-CoV-2.
Because vaccines are usually
administered to healthy people,
maintaining the highest safety
standards isn’t only an ethical
imperative but is also essential to
sustaining public trust. The story
of vaccine progress has been punctuated by both real and misguided safety concerns for as long as
vaccines have been in use. Such
concerns have included adverse
events associated with vaccination itself, quality lapses in the
manufacturing process, and false
alarms regarding vaccine safety.
The potential for financial gain
has fueled liability suits related
to putative safety concerns. The
NAM has conducted ongoing objective assessments of vaccine
safety to help address concerns.
Between 2000 and 2004, its Immunization Safety Review Committee evaluated evidence pertinent to various vaccine-safety
topics and set a new standard for
independent scientific review that
remains relevant as the NAM contributes to coronavirus-related
policies.
Vaccine confidence depends on
trust in the safety and efficacy of
the products themselves, trust in
vaccine manufacturers and the
clinicians who administer vaccines, and trust in policymakers
who assess the scientific evidence
and promulgate vaccination recommendations. Failures in any of
these areas can have substantial
long-term public health consequences, as was the case with
misinformation about measles
vaccines. Enduring mistrust stemming from a discredited study
that associated childhood vaccination with autism has been
linked to recent outbreaks of measles in the United States.
Sustaining both vaccine safety
and trust in vaccination will become increasingly complex. Vaccines continue to be approved,
and more vaccines have become
accessible in resource-limited
countries, but safety surveillance
systems are less evolved in many
low-income regions than in highincome regions. Similarly, vaccines are being manufactured in
regions where regulatory oversight isn’t always optimal, and
counterfeit vaccines remain a
threat. Emerging infections may
require rapid availability of new
vaccines before comprehensive
safety studies are complete. Perhaps most important, the speed
and reach of communication on
social media platforms have created unprecedented opportunities
for users to amplify misinformation and flame the fears of parents and other stakeholders in the
immunization ecosystem.
Moving forward, vaccines
against a range of infectious
agents will need to be developed.
New and reemerging pathogens,
such as SARS-CoV-2 and new influenza strains, regularly appear.
Viruses that are capable of spreading by vector or airborne routes
— one of the most important
pandemic threats — continue to
emerge. More than 1.5 million as
yet unknown viruses are estimated to exist in animals worldwide,
and 38 to 50% of them are candidates to spread to humans.
Global-surveillance and virusdiscovery programs are therefore
important, and they may be able
to predict pandemics. In 2011,
the IOM commissioned the development of a strategic multiattribute ranking tool for vaccines
to facilitate evaluation of new
vaccine targets and help guide
decisions about prioritizing vaccine-development efforts.
When pandemics emerge, rapid
responses are necessary. Vaccines
aren’t the only available tool:
passive administration of antibodies for prevention or treatment of infectious diseases has
been used for many years. The
Pandemic Prevention Platform program of the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency aims
to develop a new form of passive
antibody protection that can slow
viral epidemics starting within
60 days after identification of the
pathogen and until a vaccine can
be made. Thanks to new technology, the vaccine-development process is also being condensed.
Experimental vaccines were developed and ready for phase 1
clinical trials in 20 months for
SARS after the epidemic began in
2003 and in slightly more than
3 months for Zika virus in 2016.
The response to the Covid-19
pandemic is a prime example of
how rapidly new vaccines can
now be designed. By the time the
WHO declared Covid-19 a pandemic on March 11, 2020, at least
37 groups from biotechnology
companies and academic institutions were working on vaccine
candidates. These candidates include live attenuated, inactivated,
DNA, messenger RNA, viral vector, and spike-protein–based vaccines. Less than 1 year later, the
first Covid-19 vaccine-efficacy
trials have now been completed,
and the first vaccines are authorized for emergency use.
Many approved vaccines, such
as those against measles and
polio, were made using attenuated or killed versions
An audio interview
of the virus without
with Dr. Gerberding
detailed knowledge
is available at NEJM.org
of viral pathogenesis.
In contrast, current strategies for
vaccine design rely on new technologies that lead to a deeper
understanding of the immune
system and of host–pathogen interactions. For new experimental
HIV and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccines, a detailed
structural understanding of antibody interactions with the HIV
envelope or the RSV prefusion
form of the fusion (F) protein is
needed.
Vaccines remain the most effective tool for preventing infectious diseases and improving
global health. Remarkable progress has been made with the use
of vaccines, including the eradication of smallpox and the control of childhood diseases such
as measles, mumps, rubella,
and polio. New insights into the
functioning of the immune system on a cellular and molecular
level have made possible the rapid development of new vaccines.
Difficulties facing vaccinologists
include predicting the type and
timing of the next pandemic; developing vaccines to combat rapidly changing pathogens such as
HIV-1, influenza, and multidrugresistant bacteria; and establishing rapid-response strategies to
control emerging and reemerging
infectious diseases. The future
holds great promise for vaccinemediated control of global pathogens, but providing affordable access to effective vaccines for
everyone who could benefit from
them remains an important challenge.





Placebo-Controlled Trials of Covid-19 Vaccines —
Why We Still Need Them
WHO Ad Hoc Expert Group on the Next Steps for Covid-19 Vaccine Evaluation​​
Placebo-Controlled Trials of Covid-19 Vaccines

Recent announcements that some Covid-19
vaccines are estimated to have high short-term
efficacy provide new hope that vaccination
will soon contribute to controlling the pandemic.
The initial roll-out of limited
quantities of vaccines that are still
investigational will provide the
opportunity to ethically obtain pivotal data to improve regulatory
and public health decision making, thereby increasing public and
professional confidence in these
and other vaccines.
After relatively short follow-up
in phase 3 trials, even when vaccine efficacy appears to be high,
reliable information will still be
needed on longer-term safety and
duration of protection. Other information gaps will include
more comprehensive assessments
of short-term safety, knowledge
of whether waning of vaccineinduced protection may lead to
vaccine-enhanced disease if a
vaccinee becomes infected on exposure to SARS-CoV-2, information on protection against clinically severe forms of Covid-19,
and knowledge of any associations between the degree of protection and the recipient’s age or
coexisting conditions. Even after
the first vaccines become available, it will still be important to
evaluate additional vaccines to
meet worldwide needs.
On November 6, 2020, we, as
participants in a World Health
Organization (WHO) ad hoc consultation on the next steps for
Covid-19 vaccine evaluation, discussed what critical additional
data should be sought to inform
regulatory and policy recommendations for the first successful
vaccines and subsequent optimization. Consensus emerged that
while it is still feasible and ethical,
ongoing studies and others that
are about to start should continue
to collect high-quality information
using directly randomized comparisons against placebo to address as many of the data requirements as possible. While vaccine
supplies are limited, available vaccines are still investigational, or
public health recommendations to
use those vaccines have not been
made, we believe it is ethically
appropriate to continue blinded
follow-up of placebo recipients in
existing trials and to randomly
assign new participants to vaccine
or placebo. Moreover, under these
conditions, we believe that trial
sponsors are not ethically obligated to unblind treatment assignments for participants who desire
to obtain a different investigational vaccine. People who enroll
in clinical trials for altruistic reasons would probably understand
the value of gathering data that
will further elucidate the safety
and efficacy of these vaccines and
their appropriate use.
Conversely, there was concern
that observational data obtained
from nonrandomized studies after vaccine deployment could yield
unreliable answers. Observational
studies are subject to substantial
biases and are much less amenable to unambiguous interpretation. Their limitations are of particular concern during this public
health emergency, because vaccinated and unvaccinated people
will differ in their risk of exposure
to infection and of serious disease, partly because of fluctuating
attack rates and because during
early phases of vaccine deployment, vaccinees may well be at
particular risk of infection. In
these circumstances, even carefully analyzed observational studies can yield misleading answers
about safety and efficacy. In addition, unrelated events that occur
by chance after vaccination may be
incorrectly attributed to the vaccine, and such anecdotes may be
deliberately promulgated by groups
opposed to vaccination.
Large,
placebo-controlled,
phase 3 efficacy trials could provide much of the needed information if they have appropriately
prolonged follow-up while random
assignments are still blinded.
Such continuation would yield unbiased evidence on the duration
of protection and on longer-term
safety, including assessment of any
evidence of the vaccine eventually
enhancing the risk of severe disease (as was recently detected by
continued follow-up of placebo
recipients in dengue vaccine studies). If there are hazards, they
need to be identified; conversely,
longer follow-up might reassuringly demonstrate continued protection with few or no adverse
consequences, reducing vaccine
hesitancy.
This opportunity to obtain reliable evidence about longer-term
effects would be destroyed by early unblinding and immediate vaccination of participants assigned
to placebo. Although each participant has the option to pursue
any available intervention, if substantial numbers of participants
choose not to do so, continuation
of blinded follow-up in a population in which no licensed vaccine
is being deployed could yield important and unexpected findings
that would be difficult to obtain
reliably any other way.
Thus, early deployment of
scarce doses of still-investigational
vaccines (under Emergency Use
Listing [EUL] or similar regulatory mechanisms) could bring additional public health benefits if
accompanied by firm commitments to maintaining blinded follow-up of participants in ongoing
or future placebo-controlled trials
until a licensed vaccine is fully deployed in the population. In some
settings, early deployment could
instead use the Expanded Access/
Compassionate Use (EA/CU)
mechanism, under which recipients are unambiguously informed
of the vaccine’s investigational nature. For example, under trying
conditions, the WHO deployed an
Ebola vaccine under EA/CU during the recent outbreak in the
Democratic Republic of Congo,
ensuring that hundreds of thousands of prioritized persons received an investigational vaccine
that was in limited supply.
Because hundreds of millions
of people in some priority groups
will eventually be vaccinated
against Covid-19, the world needs
highly reliable evidence of vaccine safety that can be straightforwardly and convincingly explained to the public. Indeed, the
ultimate impact of Covid-19 vaccines in a population may depend more on the prevalence of
hesitancy or strong disinclination
to receive a Covid-19 vaccine than
on whether the vaccine has 95%,
80%, or 70% efficacy. Current
phase 3 studies typically provide
controlled data on about 20,000
vaccine recipients and 20,000 placebo recipients. Although these
numbers should suffice for detecting relatively common adverse
events, there is a risk of missing
or exaggerating less common but
clinically important events. Because large numbers of people
will rapidly be vaccinated, vaccination will inevitably seem to be
temporally associated with some
uncommon adverse events. A
large, simple trial to evaluate serious safety outcomes, in which
many participants (even hundreds
of thousands) are randomly assigned to vaccine or placebo and
those who receive placebo are
vaccinated only about 2 months
later could identify any rare but
serious short-term side effects or
show that there were none. Such
a trial could be conducted either
during a period of emergency use
or immediately after licensure and
could be viewed as a fair way of
allocating initially limited vaccine supplies.
What about vaccine candidates
that do not become available for
phase 3 study until after effective
vaccines have already been deployed in some locations? Additional vaccines with worthwhile
efficacy would still be desirable,
especially if they could be readily
deployed on a large scale or if
safety concerns emerge with the
first vaccines. For example, a 70%
effective single-dose vaccine may
be more valuable than a two-dose
regimen with 90% efficacy and
greater implementation challenges. It is noteworthy that such a
vaccine could not be identified
without using placebo controls.
Participants in trials of such vaccines should have access to the
standard of care in their location and, if the trial is successful, their communities should
share in the benefit. Countries
with limited or no access to a
known effective vaccine could thus
ethically permit placebo-controlled
trials of vaccines of potential relevance to them even if effective
vaccines were already being marketed elsewhere.
Randomized,
placebo-controlled trials are the bedrock of
modern clinical decision making
and remain the most efficient way
to obtain reliable results. If successful, focused attempts to ascertain correlates of protection
could materially accelerate acceptance of second-generation vaccines but alone cannot provide an
adequate basis for assessing safety and efficacy. Early clinical trial
results may offer promise, but they
cannot provide all the reliable data
required. Randomized, noninferiority trials can provide clinically relevant data in some cases, but
at a considerable cost to efficiency.
We can address important
needs with continued follow-up
of placebo recipients in phase 3
trials, use of placebo controls in
large, simple safety trials, and

clinical data from placebo-controlled, randomized trials evaluating new vaccines. A concerted
global effort to collect such data
while it’s still possible would increase the likelihood of reliably
identifying multiple vaccines with
favorable benefit–risk profiles.
These studies would go far toward
earning the broad public confidence required for widespread
vaccine acceptance so that we can
bring this pandemic to an end.



Testing in a Pandemic — Improving Access, Coordination,
and Prioritization

The moment a new lethal virus begins spreading in human populations, public health authorities and the communities they serve enter a race against time to prevent a major outbreak.

Success depends on tracking viral
spread rapidly from its early stages
to identify people who are infected
and protect those who aren’t.
With SARS-CoV-2, the United
States lost that race. Nearly a year
into the U.S. outbreak, the national case count exceeds 20 million. Most of the country is still
not doing enough testing. When
tests are performed, the organizations processing them often
fail to achieve fast enough turnaround times (ideally, 1 to 2 days)
to permit effective contact-tracing
efforts. On average, Americans
wait 4 days to receive a test result;
10% of Americans have waited
10 days or more. And testing is
beset by racial disparities. Many
people are now asking why these
failures persist. The answer is
twofold.

First, we failed to build and
scale up sufficient capacity for
diagnostic tests in clinical laboratories. During the first month
of the U.S. response, our highly
centralized regulatory system prevented many laboratories from
joining production efforts. Once
a pathway was opened, leaders of
most clinical laboratories either
didn’t know how to navigate regulations or lacked the capacity
and resources to produce their
own tests. Today, only 45 of
260,000 U.S. laboratories certified
under the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)
standards have received emergency use authorizations (EUAs)
to produce their own laboratorydeveloped tests (LDTs), and 197
are using tests of their own that
have been validated but have not
yet been approved by the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA).
Even the FDA’s August 2020 decision to allow laboratories to establish Covid-19 LDTs without
premarket approval failed to encourage further production by the
vast majority of clinical microbiology laboratories, and potentially added more hurdles, given that
liability protections under the
Public Readiness and Emergency
Preparedness Act disappeared in
the absence of EUA coverage.
A simple technological solution was available: polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). A highly
sensitive and specific nucleic acid
testing technology, PCR is well
suited for clinical testing and
easily adaptable for new pathogens. Yet most clinical laboratories have not used it to develop
their own tests. Instead, we became dependent on commercial
manufacturers, creating a system
that leads to price gouging: in
some instances, prices of Covid
tests have reached $2,315.

Simultaneously, the federal government did not adequately use
its power to support expansion
of production capacity in clinical
laboratories. The Defense Production Act (DPA) could have been
used to fund broad, distributed
production of tests and to forcefully check otherwise-unfettered
capitalism. Instead, according to
the Congressional Research Service, the Trump administration’s
invocation of the DPA was “sporadic” and “narrow”: of the $1 billion allotted by the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act for production
of personal protective equipment
and testing materials, $688 million was redirected to Department
of Defense expenses.
Second, our leadership never
created a coherent national prioritization strategy for the distribution of limited testing capacity.
Meanwhile, the current administration, professional sports teams,
businesses, colleges, and others
began testing many thousands of
asymptomatic people — sometimes daily — often while surrounding communities struggled
to meet basic clinical testing
needs. Asymptomatic surveillance
testing is a useful addition to a
robust testing strategy, but when
testing and resources are scarce,
it is wasteful and can even be ineffective in protecting the groups
surveyed, as the White House outbreak demonstrates. The more we
delay prioritizing and creating the
infrastructure needed for hypothesis-driven testing (e.g., symptomatic persons, contacts, high-risk
groups) on a massive scale, the
more we risk containment failure.
Other countries have shown
responsible leadership, prioritization, and coordination. From the
pandemic’s outset, a distributed
network of German laboratories
had the expertise and capacity
needed to rapidly develop and
implement PCR tests, facilitated by
their centralized national health
care system. They overcame supply shortages through standardized criteria prioritizing symptomatic cases, and with clinical
cases largely under control by
May, they responsibly shifted to
asymptomatic surveillance testing
of at-risk communities. Similarly,
molecular biologists throughout
Africa started developing PCRbased tests for SARS-CoV-2 in
early February.
By building distributed capacity and prioritizing resources in
response to public health demands, the United States, too,
can transform our trajectory in
fighting this pandemic — and
preempting future ones. The essential steps are clear.
First, we need to support clinical laboratories to build LDTs
and navigate regulations with
ease and speed. Continued test
shortages prove that funneling
resources into a few commercial
companies alone is not enough.
To quickly respond to emergent
viruses or new variants of existing viruses, and to provide stopgaps to prevent spread, we must
empower the FDA, the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the public health
community to support — by
means of clear regulatory processes and training — broader,
distributed capacity to build and
administer tests in clinical labs.
The FDA can simplify regulatory processes for LDTs and provide resources for navigating a
rigorous but nononerous authorization process. Rather than remove oversight altogether, the
agency should set and maintain
common standards and straightforward expectations for regulatory processing of tests, with
quality and efficiency being paramount. Particularly during an
outbreak, they should provide
greater resources to support applicants and give regular updates
on the timeline for approval.
The CDC, public health departments, and others can provide training courses and materials for creating clinical grade
LDTs that meet FDA standards,
for troubleshooting, and for completing clinical validation. We have
seen firsthand that such LDT
creation is possible, through our
hospital network in West and
Central Africa (https://acegid​.­org)
and at Massachusetts General
Hospital, where we established a
real-time reverse-transcriptase–
PCR LDT for SARS-CoV-2 within
a week after the FDA began allowing it.
Second, research and development resources must be provided.
Grants, loans, and incentives
should be broadly administered
under Title III of the DPA to enable clinical laboratories to acquire the equipment, consumables, and reagents needed for
building, validating, and conducting tests. The allocation authority of the DPA should be used to
encourage fair and need-based
allocation of scarce testing supplies to laboratories in regions of
high transmission risk. We believe that the United States also
requires either a new national institute or far greater support for
existing ones to provide a range of
resources to all test developers,
including engineered and patient
clinical samples and reagents,
within short time frames. As a
federal entity, such an institute
could enable a centralized allocation strategy for diagnostic development resources at reasonable
cost, under the DPA.
Third, we need to prioritize
test distribution. Successful containment of Covid-19 requires a
prioritization strategy for facilitating equitable access to tests
according to need. In communities where the demand remains
unmet, decision makers will have
to redirect existing clinical grade
testing to symptomatic people,
contacts, and high-prevalence
areas before spending resources
on surveillance testing of lowrisk persons. To enable a full
economic reopening of the United
States, non–clinical grade tools
could be dedicated to surveillance and to identifying potential
asymptomatic cases
for clinical investigation. Simple PCR
available at NEJM.org
tests administered
outside CLIA settings, and other
easy-to-use surveillance tools such
as loop-mediated isothermal amplification — a highly specific,
cost-effective, rapid, and scalable
technology — are currently being
explored as potential alternatives.

As we fight Covid-19 and prepare for new threats, including a
potentially pandemic-level strain
of influenza, we need to pave a
better path. We believe that our
leaders need to motivate and support a laboratory-based testing
model that enables broad and
distributed production capacity.
We must build a national system
that operates according to rapid
regulatory processes with clear,
rigorous standards, facilitates innovation and training, provides resources for ongoing test development, and prioritizes supplies on
the basis of need. Before Covid-19,
virologists predicted the emergence of a novel “Disease X.” It’s
here now, and we still have not
contained it. When “Disease Y”
arrives, will we have learned?

